javascript/react-js/inputs-and-lists.md, before:

### Introduction

Before we go any further, we'll dive into an assignment that will test our knowledge thus far. You **should** attempt to do the assignment on your own first. You can then proceed further along in this lesson to see the walkthrough of how we approached it.  Don't be discouraged if you find yourself stuck. The previous material should equip you to solve or search for the right things. However, once you've given it an honest effort (you'd only be cheating yourself if you didn't!), continue with the lesson to achieve enlightenment on how things can be done.

If you feel uneasy about what we've learned so far, go back and review the concepts of `state` and `props` from the previous lessons.

### Learning Outcomes

- Understanding how to render lists in React
- Understanding how to handle input fields and forms in React.

### Assignment

### Do-It-Yourself Guide

Our application will be made of two components, `App` and `Overview`. Your application should render an input field and a submit button. With the submit button, you can add the content from your input to a "tasks array" that is managed in state. (We will use class components for this example because we haven't introduced hooks in this section yet). Finally, for each task in the tasks array, an HTML list element should be rendered.

1. Run `npx create-react-app task-app`, `cd` into your project and open it. You can delete everything in the return statement of the App component and just return an empty `div`. You can also delete all of the boilerplate `create-react-app` provides and just leave `index.js` and `App.js` in the src directory. Just make sure to clean up the import statements and the `serviceWorker` in the two remaining files. If you aren't familiar with what code or files we are referring to, go back to the first lesson of this section.
2. Create a `components` folder in your `src` directory and create a file for your component called `Overview.js`. `Overview.js` should just render  our tasks, while `App.js` is going to handle the input field with the logic.
3. With the intended functionality explained, it's your turn to implement this React app. You can do it. You are not required to style this assignment unless you wish to, the focus is on using event handlers and dealing with forms with state.
4. **Quick tip**: Use the JavaScript function `map` to map over your tasks array. You will need to provide a unique key to each item (read the warning, you'll know it when you see it in the console!). And there is a difference between handling input fields in plain JavaScript and in React. If you face a problem with it, attempt to figure it out on your own using tools like the documentation, StackOverflow, Google, or experimenting. But fear not, we will again provide an overview of our solution below.

### Detailed Guide

1. Let's get started! First, run `npx create-react-app task-app` in your terminal, and open the project in your text editor.

2. Delete all files in the src directory and just leave `index.js` and `App.js`.

3. Open your `App.js` file in your `src` directory and make sure it looks like this.

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";

class App extends Component {
  render() {
    return <div>Hello World</div>;
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

4. Make sure to clean the `index.js` as well. It should look something similar to this:

~~~javascript
// Index.js

import React from "react";
import ReactDOM from "react-dom";
import App from "./App";

ReactDOM.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <App />
  </React.StrictMode>,
  document.getElementById("root")
);
~~~

5. We may style the application using "vanilla" CSS to make it look a little bit nicer. At this point, you should be familiar with the basics of CSS from the previous material. 
If you intend on styling the application, we highly recommend that you use your own styling instead of using CSS frameworks that are beyond the current scope of the curriculum. Please refer to both [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/CSS_basics) and [React](https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-styling.html) documentation if you wish to know more about how to style React applications with CSS. If you are following along with this tutorial and do not wish to style the application, you can skip this step.

6. Go back to your `src` directory and create a new folder called `components` with a file named `Overview.js`. This and our `App.js` file will be the main parts of the project. In `Overview.js`, we will display all our tasks, while the App component in `App.js` will contain all the logic and manage state. Don't forget to capitalize the names of your components. It doesn't change their functionality, but it is a widely accepted "best practice".

7. Finally, let's write some code. To begin, in our `App.js` file, our class component should look like this.

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: { text: ''},
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  render() {
    const { task, tasks } = this.state;

    return (
      <div>
        <form>
          <label htmlFor="taskInput">Enter task</label>
          <input type="text" id="taskInput"/>
          <button type="submit">
            Add Task
          </button>
        </form>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

We created the skeleton of our component. First, we imported `React` and `Component` from "react", then we initialized the constructor. In the constructor, we defined state with:

~~~javascript
this.state = {
  task: { text: '' },
  tasks: [],
};
~~~

We assigned `task` to an object and `task.text` to an empty string, this will be the state handling what we type in our input field. And `tasks` will initially be set to an empty array. Later, we will include all of our tasks here.

Also, inside the render function, we destructured our state in order to make our code look cleaner when using it.

After that, we render a form element with an `input` and a `button` element. 

Now, let's have a look at what our application looks like. Run `npm start` in your terminal to open up the application in the browser. You should now see an input field with a label and a submit button. When you click the button, nothing happens and the page only refreshes.

Let's add some functionality to it. Go back to your `App.js` component and add the following two functions. Make sure to add those functions between your constructor and the render method.

~~~javascript
handleChange = (e) => {
  this.setState({
    task : {
      text: e.target.value,
    }
  });
};

onSubmitTask = (e) => {
  e.preventDefault();
  this.setState({
    tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
    task: { text: '' },
  });
};
~~~

Naturally, if we do not invoke those functions nothing will change in our application. So let's call them. The `handleChange` function will be our `onChange` handler for our input field. It sets the current `task` in state to whatever we type in our input field. The `onSubmitTask` function will be our `onSubmit` handler for our `form` element. The `onSubmit` handler of the form should be invoked by clicking the button.

In the `onSubmitTask` function, we first call `e.preventDefault()` because we don't want the default behavior of refreshing the form anytime we submit it. After that, we modify state.

The following line does the magic.

~~~javascript
tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
~~~

It adds the task (whatever is in our input field when we submit the form) to our `tasks` array. Later we can map over this array to display all the tasks we submitted. Make sure that you **DON'T** directly assign state. That is also the reason we don't use the `push` method here. It would give us an error.

After that, we set `task` in state to the initial object with `task.text` as an empty string, because we want our input field to be empty, in order to add another task.

We still haven't invoked those functions yet, so let's do that.

In your `App.js` component in your render method, add an onChange handler to your input element like so:

~~~javascript
<input
  onChange={this.handleChange}
  value={task.text}
  type="text"
  id="taskInput"
/>
~~~

Notice that we also have to specify the `value` attribute for React input elements. In this case we want the value of the input field to be what we saved in our `task` object in state under the `text` property.

And also add the `onSubmitTask` function to our form element like so:

~~~javascript
<form onSubmit={this.onSubmitTask}>
  {/* Leave all your code. Just add the onSubmit handler to the form element, or
  as an onClick handler to the submit button, as you prefer */}
</form>
~~~

If you add an onSubmit handler to the form, your button must be of `type="submit"`, otherwise it won't work. Alternatively, you can add an `onClick` event to the button which calls the `onSubmitTask` function.

Great, if you run your application now with `npm start` (or refresh the browser if it's still running), you will still see no changes, except that the page doesn't refresh when you submit something. That's because we haven't displayed anything yet. Let's do that now.

Go to your `Overview.js` file in the components folder and add the following code:

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

It takes the `tasks` from the `props` and maps over it. For each task it will then display a `li` element with the content of tasks. When checking out the application in the browser we can see we received an error message which says that a unique key is required. React always requires you to add a unique key to each element when you `map` over a list. In real world projects you often use database ids as unique keys, however in this project we are not using a database, so let's install a package that provides us with unique ids.

Run `npm install uniqid` in your project folder. Uniqid is a package which creates unique ids based on the current time, the process and the machine name. Once this is done, we just have to include it like this:

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";
import uniqid from "uniqid";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: {
        text: '',
        id: uniqid()
      },
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  handleChange = (e) => {
    this.setState({
      task: {
        text: e.target.value,
        id: this.state.task.id,
      },
    });
  };

  onSubmitTask = (e) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    this.setState({
      tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
    });
  };
~~~

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li key={task.id}>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

Almost done, the only thing we need to do is import our `Overview` component to our `App.js` file and add it in our render method, while passing down the `tasks` array as props.

Add this line to the top of your `App.js` file, right below where we import React.

~~~javascript
import Overview from "./components/Overview";
~~~

And then add the Overview component to your render method in `App.js`. Add this line of code right before the last closing `div`, and right after the closing `form` tag in `App.js`.

~~~javascript
<Overview tasks={tasks} />
~~~

Here we go, run `npm start` (or refresh) one last time. If you've done everything right, you should now be able to type a task into the input field and click submit to display it right below the input field. Feel free to play around a little bit and maybe change or style it as you like.

Your finished files should look like this:

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";
import Overview from "./components/Overview";
import uniqid from "uniqid";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  handleChange = (e) => {
    this.setState({
      task: {
        text: e.target.value,
        id: this.state.task.id,
      },
    });
  };

  onSubmitTask = (e) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    this.setState({
      tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
    });
  };

  render() {
    const { task, tasks } = this.state;

    return (
      <div>
        <form onSubmit={this.onSubmitTask}>
          <label htmlFor="taskInput">Enter task</label>
          <input
            onChange={this.handleChange}
            value={task.text}
            type="text"
            id="taskInput"
          />
          <button type="submit">Add Task</button>
        </form>
        <Overview tasks={tasks} />
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li key={task.id}>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

### Optional Tasks / Ideas to play around

Here are a few optional tasks for you to practice. Try them out, if you can't solve them, continue with the curriculum and make sure to come back later to give them another try and see how you advanced.

### **Easy**

1. Instead of displaying unordered list items, manage the amount of tasks in state and let each task display its number. Yes, you could also do that with a simple ordered list, but where's the fun in that? Try using state.
2. Implement a delete button for each task. The delete button should remove the specific task from the state array. Don't forget to never directly assign state. If you want you can use [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/) for the icon.
   **Tip**: You can remove each task by its id, but for that you have to save the task id together with the task title.

### **Hard:**

1. Implement an edit button for each task. When you press the edit button, this specific task should become changeable, and the edit button should change to a resubmit button.

### Additional Resources

1. The sections on [Handling Events](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html) and [Conditional Rendering](https://reactjs.org/docs/conditional-rendering.html) from the React documentation are helpful if you are stuck!

Commit message:

added knowledge checks and associated links

javascript/react-js/inputs-and-lists.md, after:

### Introduction

Before we go any further, we'll dive into an assignment that will test our knowledge thus far. You **should** attempt to do the assignment on your own first. You can then proceed further along in this lesson to see the walkthrough of how we approached it.  Don't be discouraged if you find yourself stuck. The previous material should equip you to solve or search for the right things. However, once you've given it an honest effort (you'd only be cheating yourself if you didn't!), continue with the lesson to achieve enlightenment on how things can be done.

If you feel uneasy about what we've learned so far, go back and review the concepts of `state` and `props` from the previous lessons.

### Learning Outcomes
By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

- Explain how to render lists in React
- Explain how to handle input fields and forms in React

### Assignment

### Do-It-Yourself Guide

Our application will be made of two components, `App` and `Overview`. Your application should render an input field and a submit button. With the submit button, you can add the content from your input to a "tasks array" that is managed in state. (We will use class components for this example because we haven't introduced hooks in this section yet). Finally, for each task in the tasks array, an HTML list element should be rendered.

1. Run `npx create-react-app task-app`, `cd` into your project and open it. You can delete everything in the return statement of the App component and just return an empty `div`. You can also delete all of the boilerplate `create-react-app` provides and just leave `index.js` and `App.js` in the src directory. Just make sure to clean up the import statements and the `serviceWorker` in the two remaining files. If you aren't familiar with what code or files we are referring to, go back to the first lesson of this section.
2. Create a `components` folder in your `src` directory and create a file for your component called `Overview.js`. `Overview.js` should just render  our tasks, while `App.js` is going to handle the input field with the logic.
3. With the intended functionality explained, it's your turn to implement this React app. You can do it. You are not required to style this assignment unless you wish to, the focus is on using event handlers and dealing with forms with state.
4. **Quick tip**: Use the JavaScript function `map` to map over your tasks array. You will need to provide a unique key to each item (read the warning, you'll know it when you see it in the console!). And there is a difference between handling input fields in plain JavaScript and in React. If you face a problem with it, attempt to figure it out on your own using tools like the documentation, StackOverflow, Google, or experimenting. But fear not, we will again provide an overview of our solution below.

### Detailed Guide

1. Let's get started! First, run `npx create-react-app task-app` in your terminal, and open the project in your text editor.

2. Delete all files in the src directory and just leave `index.js` and `App.js`.

3. Open your `App.js` file in your `src` directory and make sure it looks like this.

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";

class App extends Component {
  render() {
    return <div>Hello World</div>;
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

4. Make sure to clean the `index.js` as well. It should look something similar to this:

~~~javascript
// Index.js

import React from "react";
import ReactDOM from "react-dom";
import App from "./App";

ReactDOM.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <App />
  </React.StrictMode>,
  document.getElementById("root")
);
~~~

5. We may style the application using "vanilla" CSS to make it look a little bit nicer. At this point, you should be familiar with the basics of CSS from the previous material. 
If you intend on styling the application, we highly recommend that you use your own styling instead of using CSS frameworks that are beyond the current scope of the curriculum. Please refer to both [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/CSS_basics) and [React](https://reactjs.org/docs/faq-styling.html) documentation if you wish to know more about how to style React applications with CSS. If you are following along with this tutorial and do not wish to style the application, you can skip this step.

6. Go back to your `src` directory and create a new folder called `components` with a file named `Overview.js`. This and our `App.js` file will be the main parts of the project. In `Overview.js`, we will display all our tasks, while the App component in `App.js` will contain all the logic and manage state. Don't forget to capitalize the names of your components. It doesn't change their functionality, but it is a widely accepted "best practice".

7. Finally, let's write some code. To begin, in our `App.js` file, our class component should look like this.

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: { text: ''},
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  render() {
    const { task, tasks } = this.state;

    return (
      <div>
        <form>
          <label htmlFor="taskInput">Enter task</label>
          <input type="text" id="taskInput"/>
          <button type="submit">
            Add Task
          </button>
        </form>
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

We created the skeleton of our component. First, we imported `React` and `Component` from "react", then we initialized the constructor. In the constructor, we defined state with:

~~~javascript
this.state = {
  task: { text: '' },
  tasks: [],
};
~~~

We assigned `task` to an object and `task.text` to an empty string, this will be the state handling what we type in our input field. And `tasks` will initially be set to an empty array. Later, we will include all of our tasks here.

Also, inside the render function, we destructured our state in order to make our code look cleaner when using it.

After that, we render a form element with an `input` and a `button` element. 

Now, let's have a look at what our application looks like. Run `npm start` in your terminal to open up the application in the browser. You should now see an input field with a label and a submit button. When you click the button, nothing happens and the page only refreshes.

Let's add some functionality to it. Go back to your `App.js` component and add the following two functions. Make sure to add those functions between your constructor and the render method.

~~~javascript
handleChange = (e) => {
  this.setState({
    task : {
      text: e.target.value,
    }
  });
};

onSubmitTask = (e) => {
  e.preventDefault();
  this.setState({
    tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
    task: { text: '' },
  });
};
~~~

Naturally, if we do not invoke those functions nothing will change in our application. So let's call them. The `handleChange` function will be our `onChange` handler for our input field. It sets the current `task` in state to whatever we type in our input field. The `onSubmitTask` function will be our `onSubmit` handler for our `form` element. The `onSubmit` handler of the form should be invoked by clicking the button.

In the `onSubmitTask` function, we first call `e.preventDefault()` because we don't want the default behavior of refreshing the form anytime we submit it. After that, we modify state.

The following line does the magic.

~~~javascript
tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
~~~

It adds the task (whatever is in our input field when we submit the form) to our `tasks` array. Later we can map over this array to display all the tasks we submitted. Make sure that you **DON'T** directly assign state. That is also the reason we don't use the `push` method here. It would give us an error.

After that, we set `task` in state to the initial object with `task.text` as an empty string, because we want our input field to be empty, in order to add another task.

We still haven't invoked those functions yet, so let's do that.

In your `App.js` component in your render method, add an onChange handler to your input element like so:

~~~javascript
<input
  onChange={this.handleChange}
  value={task.text}
  type="text"
  id="taskInput"
/>
~~~

Notice that we also have to specify the `value` attribute for React input elements. In this case we want the value of the input field to be what we saved in our `task` object in state under the `text` property.

And also add the `onSubmitTask` function to our form element like so:

~~~javascript
<form onSubmit={this.onSubmitTask}>
  {/* Leave all your code. Just add the onSubmit handler to the form element, or
  as an onClick handler to the submit button, as you prefer */}
</form>
~~~

If you add an onSubmit handler to the form, your button must be of `type="submit"`, otherwise it won't work. Alternatively, you can add an `onClick` event to the button which calls the `onSubmitTask` function.

Great, if you run your application now with `npm start` (or refresh the browser if it's still running), you will still see no changes, except that the page doesn't refresh when you submit something. That's because we haven't displayed anything yet. Let's do that now.

Go to your `Overview.js` file in the components folder and add the following code:

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

It takes the `tasks` from the `props` and maps over it. For each task it will then display a `li` element with the content of tasks. When checking out the application in the browser we can see we received an error message which says that a unique key is required. React always requires you to add a unique key to each element when you `map` over a list. In real world projects you often use database ids as unique keys, however in this project we are not using a database, so let's install a package that provides us with unique ids.

Run `npm install uniqid` in your project folder. Uniqid is a package which creates unique ids based on the current time, the process and the machine name. Once this is done, we just have to include it like this:

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";
import uniqid from "uniqid";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: {
        text: '',
        id: uniqid()
      },
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  handleChange = (e) => {
    this.setState({
      task: {
        text: e.target.value,
        id: this.state.task.id,
      },
    });
  };

  onSubmitTask = (e) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    this.setState({
      tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
    });
  };
~~~

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li key={task.id}>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

Almost done, the only thing we need to do is import our `Overview` component to our `App.js` file and add it in our render method, while passing down the `tasks` array as props.

Add this line to the top of your `App.js` file, right below where we import React.

~~~javascript
import Overview from "./components/Overview";
~~~

And then add the Overview component to your render method in `App.js`. Add this line of code right before the last closing `div`, and right after the closing `form` tag in `App.js`.

~~~javascript
<Overview tasks={tasks} />
~~~

Here we go, run `npm start` (or refresh) one last time. If you've done everything right, you should now be able to type a task into the input field and click submit to display it right below the input field. Feel free to play around a little bit and maybe change or style it as you like.

Your finished files should look like this:

~~~javascript
// App.js

import React, { Component } from "react";
import Overview from "./components/Overview";
import uniqid from "uniqid";

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
      tasks: [],
    };
  }

  handleChange = (e) => {
    this.setState({
      task: {
        text: e.target.value,
        id: this.state.task.id,
      },
    });
  };

  onSubmitTask = (e) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    this.setState({
      tasks: this.state.tasks.concat(this.state.task),
      task: {
        text: '', 
        id: uniqid()
      },
    });
  };

  render() {
    const { task, tasks } = this.state;

    return (
      <div>
        <form onSubmit={this.onSubmitTask}>
          <label htmlFor="taskInput">Enter task</label>
          <input
            onChange={this.handleChange}
            value={task.text}
            type="text"
            id="taskInput"
          />
          <button type="submit">Add Task</button>
        </form>
        <Overview tasks={tasks} />
      </div>
    );
  }
}

export default App;
~~~

~~~javascript
// Overview.js

import React from "react";

const Overview = (props) => {
  const { tasks } = props;

  return (
    <ul>
      {tasks.map((task) => {
        return <li key={task.id}>{task.text}</li>;
      })}
    </ul>
  );
};

export default Overview;
~~~

### Optional Tasks / Ideas to play around

Here are a few optional tasks for you to practice. Try them out, if you can't solve them, continue with the curriculum and make sure to come back later to give them another try and see how you advanced.

### **Easy**

1. Instead of displaying unordered list items, manage the amount of tasks in state and let each task display its number. Yes, you could also do that with a simple ordered list, but where's the fun in that? Try using state.
2. Implement a delete button for each task. The delete button should remove the specific task from the state array. Don't forget to never directly assign state. If you want you can use [Font Awesome](https://fontawesome.com/) for the icon.
   **Tip**: You can remove each task by its id, but for that you have to save the task id together with the task title.

### **Hard:**

1. Implement an edit button for each task. When you press the edit button, this specific task should become changeable, and the edit button should change to a resubmit button.

### Additional Resources

1. The sections on [Handling Events](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html) and [Conditional Rendering](https://reactjs.org/docs/conditional-rendering.html) from the React documentation are helpful if you are stuck!


### Knowledge Check

 - <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#detailed-guide">How do you render lists in React?</a>
 - <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#detailed-guide">How do you handle input fields and forms in React?</a>
